README.md, before:

# hdfmap
Map objects within an HDF file and create a dataset namespace.

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/dls-dodal.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/hdfmap)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)
[![](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap?label=GitHub%20Repo&style=social)](https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap)

**Version 0.6**

| By Dan Porter        | 
|----------------------|
| Diamond Light Source |
| 2024                 |

[![Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/Material_for_MkDocs-526CFE?style=for-the-badge&logo=MaterialForMkDocs&logoColor=white)](https://diamondlightsource.github.io/hdfmap/)

### TL;DR - Usage

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
m = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
m['energy']  # >> '/entry/instrument/monochromator/energy'
m['signal']  # >> '/entry/measurement/sum'
m['axes0']  # >> '/entry/measurement/theta'
m.get_image_path()  # >> '/entry/instrument/pil3_100k/data'

with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    path = m.get_path('scan_command')
    cmd = nxs[path][()]  # returns bytes data direct from file
    cmd = m.get_data(nxs, 'scan_command')  # returns converted str output
    string = m.format_hdf(nxs, "the energy is {energy:.2f} keV")
    d = m.get_dataholder(nxs)  # classic data table, d.scannable, d.metadata

# Shortcuts - single file reloader class
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.hdf')
[data1, data2] = scan.get_data(['dataset_name_1', 'dataset_name_2'])
data = scan.eval('dataset_name_1 * 100 + 2')
string = scan.format('my data is {dataset_name_1:.2f}')

# Shortcuts - multifile load data (generate map from first file)
from hdfmap import hdf_data, hdf_eval, hdf_format, hdf_image

all_data = hdf_data([f'file{n}.nxs' for n in range(100)], 'dataset_name')
normalised_data = hdf_eval(filenames, 'total / Transmission / (rc / 300.)')
descriptions = hdf_format(filenames, 'Energy: {en:5.3f} keV')
image_stack = hdf_image(filenames, index=31)
```

### Installation
*Requires:* Python >=3.10, Numpy, h5py

#### from PyPI
```bash
python -m pip install hdfmap
```

#### from GitHub
```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap.git
```

### Description
Another generic hdf reader but the idea here is to build up a namespace dict of `{'name': 'path'}` 
for every dataset, then group them in hopefully a useful way. 

Objects within the HDF file are separated into Groups and Datasets. Each object has a
defined 'path' and 'name' paramater, as well as other attributes

 - path -> '/entry/measurement/data' -> the location of an object within the file
 - name -> 'data' -> an path expressed as a simple variable name

Paths are unique locations within the file but can be used to identify similar objects in other files
Names may not be unique within a file and are generated from the path.

|               | **name**                     | **path**                             |
|---------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| *Description* | simple identifier of dataset | hdf path built from position in file |
| *Example*     | `'scan_command'`             | `'/entry/scan_command'`              |

Names of different types of datasets are stored for arrays (size > 0) and values (size 0)
Names for scannables relate to all arrays of a particular size
A combined list of names is provided where scannables > arrays > values

### HdfMap Attributes
|                |                                                        |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| map.groups     | stores attributes of each group by path                |
| map.classes    | stores list of group paths by nx_class                 |
| map.datasets   | stores attributes of each dataset by path              |
| map.arrays     | stores array dataset paths by name                     |
| map.values     | stores value dataset paths by name                     |
| map.scannables | stores array dataset paths with given size, by name    |
| map.combined   | stores array and value paths (arrays overwrite values) |
| map.image_data | stores dataset paths of image data                     |

#### E.G.
```python
map.groups = {'/hdf/group': ('class', 'name', {attrs}, [datasets])}
map.classes = {'class_name': ['/hdf/group1', '/hdf/group2']}
map.datasets = {'/hdf/group/dataset': ('name', size, shape, {attrs})}
map.arrays = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.values = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.scannables = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.image_data = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
```


### HdfMap Methods
|                                                   |                                                                |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `map.populate(h5py.File)`                         | populates the dictionaries using the  given file               |
| `map.generate_scannables(array_size)`             | populates scannables namespace with arrays of same size        |
| `map.most_common_size()`                          | returns the most common dataset size > 1                       |
| `map.get_size('name_or_path')`                    | return dataset size                                            |
| `map.get_shape('name_or_path')`                   | return dataset size                                            |
| `map.get_attr('name_or_path', 'attr')`            | return value of dataset attribute                              |
| `map.get_path('name_or_group_or_class')`          | returns path of object with name                               |
| `map.get_image_path()`                            | returns default path of detector dataset (or largest dataset)  |
| `map.get_group_path('name_or_path_or_class')`     | return path of group with class                                |
| `map.get_group_datasets('name_or_path_or_class')` | return list of dataset paths in class                          |


### HdfMap File Methods
|                                          |                                                       |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| `map.get_metadata(h5py.File)`            | returns dict of value datasets                        |
| `map.get_scannables(h5py.File)`          | returns dict of scannable datasets                    |
| `map.get_scannalbes_array(h5py.File)`    | returns numpy array of scannable datasets             |
| `map.get_dataholder(h5py.File)`          | returns dict like object with metadata and scannables |
| `map.get_image(h5py.File, index)`        | returns image data                                    |
| `map.get_data(h5py.File, 'name')`        | returns data from dataset                             |
| `map.eval(h5py.File, 'expression')`      | returns output of expression using dataset names      |
| `map.format(h5py.File, 'string {name}')` | returns output of str expression                      |


### NeXus Files
Files using the [NeXus Format](https://www.nexusformat.org/) can generate special NexusMap objects.
These work in the same way as the general HdfMaps but contain additional special names in the namespace:

|                |                                    |
|----------------|------------------------------------|
| `'axes'`       | returns path of default NXaxes     |
| `'signal'`     | returns path of default NXsignal   |

In addition, the `map.scannables` dict will be populated automatically by the names given in the "scan_fields" dataset
or by datasets from the first *NXdata* group. The default *image* data will be taken from the first 
*NXdetector* dataset.


## Examples
### scan data & metadata
Separate datasets in a NeXus file into Diamond's classic scannables and metadata, similar to what was in the old
'*.dat' files.

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    scannables = hmap.get_scannables_array(nxs)  # creates 2D numpy array
    labels = scannables.dtype.names
    metadata = hmap.get_metadata(nxs)  # {'name': value}
    d = hmap.get_dataholder(nxs)  # classic data table, d.scannable, d.metadata
d.theta == d['theta']  # scannable array 'theta'
d.metadata.scan_command == d.metadata['scan_command']  # single value 'scan_command'

# OR, use the shortcut:
from hdfmap import nexus_data_block

d = nexus_data_block('file.nxs')

# The data loader class removes the need to open the files:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
metadata = scan.get_metadata()
scannables = scan.get_scannables()
```

### automatic default plot axes
If defined in the nexus file, 'axes' and 'signal' will be populated automatically

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    axes = hmap.get_data(nxs, 'axes')
    signal = hmap.get_data(nxs, 'signal')
    title = hmap.format_hdf(nxs, "{entry_identifier}\n{scan_command}")
axes_label = hmap.get_path('axes')
signal_label = hmap.get_path('signal')
# plot the data (e.g. using matplotlib)
plt.figure()
plt.plot(axes, signal)
plt.xlabel(axes_label)
plt.ylabel(signal_label)
plt.title(title)

# Or, using NexusLoader:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
axes, signal = scan('axes, signal')
axes_label, signal_label = scan('_axes, _signal')
title = scan.format("{entry_identifier}\n{scan_command}")
```

### Automatic image data
Get images from the first detector in a NeXus file

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
image_location = hmap.get_image_path()  # returns the hdf path chosen for the default detector
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    middle_image = hmap.get_image(nxs)  # returns single image from index len(dataset)//2
    first_image = hmap.get_image(nxs, 0)  # returns single image from dataset[0, :, :]
    volume = hmap.get_image(nxs, ())  # returns whole volume as array
    roi = hmap.get_image(nxs, (0, slice(5, 10, 1), slice(5, 10, 1)))  # returns part of dataset

# Or, using NexusLoader:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
image = scan.get_image(index=0)  # using index as defined above
```

### Multi-scan metadata string
Generate a metadata string from every file in a directory very quickly. The HdfMap is only created for the first file,
the remaining files are treated as having identical structure.
```python
from hdfmap import list_files, hdf_format

format_string = "#{entry_identifier}: {start_time} : E={incident_energy:.3f} keV : {scan_command}"
files = list_files('/directoy/path', extension='.nxs')
strings_list = hdf_format(files, format_string)
print('\n'.join(strings_list))

# other multi-file readers:
from hdfmap import hdf_data, hdf_image, hdf_eval

data_list = hdf_data(files, 'incident_energy')
image_list = hdf_image(files, index=0)
data_list = hdf_eval(files, 'signal / Transmission')
```

Commit message:

Various improvements
eval_functions.py
 - added units option to dataset2str
 - added this option to functions calling dataset2str
 - added option for 's_name' to eval to generate string representation

 hdfmap_class.py
  - added get_group_classes, find_groups, find_datasets functions
  - functions allow user to easily find datasets based on several names or class names

 nexus.py
  - Changed default NXEntry warning to info

 hdf_loader.py
  - added group option to hdf_tree_string
  - added hdf_find, similar to find_datasets

tests
 - added tests for new functions

README.md, after:

# hdfmap
Map objects within an HDF file and create a dataset namespace.

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/dls-dodal.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/hdfmap)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)
[![](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap?label=GitHub%20Repo&style=social)](https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap)

**Version 0.6**

| By Dan Porter        | 
|----------------------|
| Diamond Light Source |
| 2024                 |

### Documentation
[![Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/Material_for_MkDocs-526CFE?style=for-the-badge&logo=MaterialForMkDocs&logoColor=white)](https://diamondlightsource.github.io/hdfmap/)
[diamondlightsource.github.io/hdfmap](https://diamondlightsource.github.io/hdfmap/)

### TL;DR - Usage

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file - get dataset paths:
m = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
m['energy']  # >> '/entry/instrument/monochromator/energy'
m['signal']  # >> '/entry/measurement/sum'
m['axes0']  # >> '/entry/measurement/theta'
m.get_image_path()  # >> '/entry/instrument/pil3_100k/data'

# load dataset data
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    path = m.get_path('scan_command')
    cmd = nxs[path][()]  # returns bytes data direct from file
    cmd = m.get_data(nxs, 'scan_command')  # returns converted str output
    string = m.format_hdf(nxs, "the energy is {energy:.2f} keV")
    d = m.get_dataholder(nxs)  # classic data table, d.scannable, d.metadata

# Shortcuts - single file reloader class
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.hdf')
[data1, data2] = scan.get_data(['dataset_name_1', 'dataset_name_2'])
data = scan.eval('dataset_name_1 * 100 + 2')
string = scan.format('my data is {dataset_name_1:.2f}')

# Shortcuts - multifile load data (generate map from first file)
from hdfmap import hdf_data, hdf_eval, hdf_format, hdf_image

all_data = hdf_data([f'file{n}.nxs' for n in range(100)], 'dataset_name')
normalised_data = hdf_eval(filenames, 'total / Transmission / (rc / 300.)')
descriptions = hdf_format(filenames, 'Energy: {en:5.3f} keV')
image_stack = hdf_image(filenames, index=31)
```

### Installation
*Requires:* Python >=3.10, Numpy, h5py

#### from PyPI
```bash
python -m pip install hdfmap
```

#### from GitHub
```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade git+https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/hdfmap.git
```

### Description
Another generic hdf reader but the idea here is to build up a namespace dict of `{'name': 'path'}` 
for every dataset, then group them in hopefully a useful way. 

Objects within the HDF file are separated into Groups and Datasets. Each object has a
defined 'path' and 'name' paramater, as well as other attributes

 - path -> '/entry/measurement/data' -> the location of an object within the file
 - name -> 'data' -> an path expressed as a simple variable name

Paths are unique locations within the file but can be used to identify similar objects in other files
Names may not be unique within a file and are generated from the path.

|               | **name**                     | **path**                             |
|---------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| *Description* | simple identifier of dataset | hdf path built from position in file |
| *Example*     | `'scan_command'`             | `'/entry/scan_command'`              |

Names of different types of datasets are stored for arrays (size > 0) and values (size 0)
Names for scannables relate to all arrays of a particular size
A combined list of names is provided where scannables > arrays > values

### HdfMap Attributes
|                |                                                        |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| map.groups     | stores attributes of each group by path                |
| map.classes    | stores list of group paths by nx_class                 |
| map.datasets   | stores attributes of each dataset by path              |
| map.arrays     | stores array dataset paths by name                     |
| map.values     | stores value dataset paths by name                     |
| map.scannables | stores array dataset paths with given size, by name    |
| map.combined   | stores array and value paths (arrays overwrite values) |
| map.image_data | stores dataset paths of image data                     |

#### E.G.
```python
map.groups = {'/hdf/group': ('class', 'name', {attrs}, [datasets])}
map.classes = {'class_name': ['/hdf/group1', '/hdf/group2']}
map.datasets = {'/hdf/group/dataset': ('name', size, shape, {attrs})}
map.arrays = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.values = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.scannables = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
map.image_data = {'name': '/hdf/group/dataset'}
```


### HdfMap Methods
|                                                   |                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `map.populate(h5py.File)`                         | populates the dictionaries using the  given file                            |
| `map.generate_scannables(array_size)`             | populates scannables namespace with arrays of same size                     |
| `map.most_common_size()`                          | returns the most common dataset size > 1                                    |
| `map.get_attr('name_or_path', 'attr')`            | return value of dataset attribute                                           |
| `map.get_path('name_or_group_or_class')`          | returns path of object with name                                            |
| `map.get_image_path()`                            | returns default path of detector dataset (or largest dataset)               |
| `map.get_group_path('name_or_path_or_class')`     | return path of group with class                                             |
| `map.get_group_datasets('name_or_path_or_class')` | return list of dataset paths in class                                       |
| `map.find_groups(*names_or_classes)`              | return list of group paths matching given group names or classes            |
| `map.find_datasets(*names_or_classes)`            | return list of dataset paths matching given names, classes or attributes    |
| `map.find_paths('string')`                        | return list of dataset paths containing string                              |
| `map.find_names('string')`                        | return list of dataset names containing string                              |
| `map.find_attr('attr_name')`                      | return list of paths of groups or datasets containing attribute 'attr_name' |


### HdfMap File Methods
|                                          |                                                       |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| `map.get_metadata(h5py.File)`            | returns dict of value datasets                        |
| `map.get_scannables(h5py.File)`          | returns dict of scannable datasets                    |
| `map.get_scannalbes_array(h5py.File)`    | returns numpy array of scannable datasets             |
| `map.get_dataholder(h5py.File)`          | returns dict like object with metadata and scannables |
| `map.get_image(h5py.File, index)`        | returns image data                                    |
| `map.get_data(h5py.File, 'name')`        | returns data from dataset                             |
| `map.eval(h5py.File, 'expression')`      | returns output of expression using dataset names      |
| `map.format(h5py.File, 'string {name}')` | returns output of str expression                      |


### NeXus Files
Files using the [NeXus Format](https://www.nexusformat.org/) can generate special NexusMap objects.
These work in the same way as the general HdfMaps but contain additional special names in the namespace:

|                |                                    |
|----------------|------------------------------------|
| `'axes'`       | returns path of default NXaxes     |
| `'signal'`     | returns path of default NXsignal   |

In addition, the `map.scannables` dict will be populated automatically by the names given in the "scan_fields" dataset
or by datasets from the first *NXdata* group. The default *image* data will be taken from the first 
*NXdetector* dataset.


## Examples
### scan data & metadata
Separate datasets in a NeXus file into Diamond's classic scannables and metadata, similar to what was in the old
'*.dat' files.

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    scannables = hmap.get_scannables_array(nxs)  # creates 2D numpy array
    labels = scannables.dtype.names
    metadata = hmap.get_metadata(nxs)  # {'name': value}
    d = hmap.get_dataholder(nxs)  # classic data table, d.scannable, d.metadata
d.theta == d['theta']  # scannable array 'theta'
d.metadata.scan_command == d.metadata['scan_command']  # single value 'scan_command'

# OR, use the shortcut:
from hdfmap import nexus_data_block

d = nexus_data_block('file.nxs')

# The data loader class removes the need to open the files:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
metadata = scan.get_metadata()
scannables = scan.get_scannables()
```

### automatic default plot axes
If defined in the nexus file, 'axes' and 'signal' will be populated automatically

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    axes = hmap.get_data(nxs, 'axes')
    signal = hmap.get_data(nxs, 'signal')
    title = hmap.format_hdf(nxs, "{entry_identifier}\n{scan_command}")
axes_label = hmap.get_path('axes')
signal_label = hmap.get_path('signal')
# plot the data (e.g. using matplotlib)
plt.figure()
plt.plot(axes, signal)
plt.xlabel(axes_label)
plt.ylabel(signal_label)
plt.title(title)

# Or, using NexusLoader:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
axes, signal = scan('axes, signal')
axes_label, signal_label = scan('_axes, _signal')
title = scan.format("{entry_identifier}\n{scan_command}")
```

### Automatic image data
Get images from the first detector in a NeXus file

```python
from hdfmap import create_nexus_map, load_hdf

# HdfMap from NeXus file:
hmap = create_nexus_map('file.nxs')
image_location = hmap.get_image_path()  # returns the hdf path chosen for the default detector
with load_hdf('file.nxs') as nxs:
    middle_image = hmap.get_image(nxs)  # returns single image from index len(dataset)//2
    first_image = hmap.get_image(nxs, 0)  # returns single image from dataset[0, :, :]
    volume = hmap.get_image(nxs, ())  # returns whole volume as array
    roi = hmap.get_image(nxs, (0, slice(5, 10, 1), slice(5, 10, 1)))  # returns part of dataset

# Or, using NexusLoader:
from hdfmap import NexusLoader

scan = NexusLoader('file.nxs')
image = scan.get_image(index=0)  # using index as defined above
```

### Multi-scan metadata string
Generate a metadata string from every file in a directory very quickly. The HdfMap is only created for the first file,
the remaining files are treated as having identical structure.
```python
from hdfmap import list_files, hdf_format

format_string = "#{entry_identifier}: {start_time} : E={incident_energy:.3f} keV : {scan_command}"
files = list_files('/directoy/path', extension='.nxs')
strings_list = hdf_format(files, format_string)
print('\n'.join(strings_list))

# other multi-file readers:
from hdfmap import hdf_data, hdf_image, hdf_eval

data_list = hdf_data(files, 'incident_energy')
image_list = hdf_image(files, index=0)
data_list = hdf_eval(files, 'signal / Transmission')
```
